Apple-Walnut Maple Blondies

Take a maple-apple-walnut filling, sandwich it between two shortbread-like crusts, then finish it with a maple glaze—and you have one delectable blondie. We use a little trick to create even cookie layers, grating the chilled dough into the pan. This allows us to spread the gratings around and make nice level layers before we press them into place. Blondies are typically eaten out of hand, but you can elevate these to a plated dessert if you serve them warm with a scoop of ice cream.

Ingredients
For the crust
1-1/4 cups sugar
1-1/4 cups (12 oz.) unsalted butter, slightly softened
2 large egg yolks
1/2 tsp. pure vanilla extract
2-1/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for dusting
1 tsp. baking powder
1/2 tsp. salt
For the filling
2-1/2 cups peeled, cored, and diced apples (2 large)
1-1/2 Tbs. unsalted butter
3 Tbs. pure maple syrup
1/2 cup chopped walnuts
1-1/2 tsp. lemon juice
1 tsp. finely grated lemon zest
For the glaze
3 Tbs. unsalted butter
1/3 cup pure maple syrup
1-1/2 cups confectioners’ sugar

Preparation
Make the crust
In a food processor, combine the sugar and butter. Pulse until smooth, about 1 minute. Add the yolks and vanilla, and pulse until well combined.

In a small bowl, combine the flour, baking powder, and salt. Add half of the dry ingredients to the butter mixture, and process until combined, scraping down the sides as necessary. Add the remaining dry mixture, and process until combined.

Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface. With floured hands, knead the dough gently until smooth, about 30 seconds. Divide the dough in half, and shape halves into logs. Wrap each half in plastic wrap, and freeze.

 

For the filling
In a medium saucepan, combine the apples and butter. Cook, covered, over medium heat until tender, stirring occasionally, 6 to 7 minutes. Add the maple syrup. Cook, covered, for 3 minutes more. Remove from the heat, and stir in the walnuts, lemon juice, and lemon zest. Transfer the filling to a plate, and let cool.

Lightly butter and flour an 8×8-inch baking pan, preferably metal (reduce the heat to 325°F if using glass).

Grate one dough half with a box grater directly into the pan, stopping occasionally to evenly distribute the gratings. Press the dough evenly into the pan and slightly up the sides, about 1/3 inch. Refrigerate until dough is firm, 45 to 60 minutes.

Preheat the oven to 350°F. Spread the apple filling evenly over the crust. Grate the remaining dough half over the filling, stopping occasionally to evenly distribute the gratings. Press the gratings into the blondie.

Bake on the middle rack for 30 minutes. Rotate the pan front to back, and bake until the top is light golden brown, 15 to 20 minutes more. Transfer to a wire rack, and let cool completely.

Make the glaze
In a small saucepan, heat the butter and maple syrup over medium-low heat until the butter is melted, then add the confectioners’ sugar, and whisk until smooth. Let cool 1 minute, then generously drizzle on the blondies. If the glaze starts to set or becomes too thick for drizzling, warm it briefly over very low heat.